=head1 NAME

Handel::Manual::Schema - An overview of the default database schema.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The default schemas in Handel are really just DBIx::Class::Schema classes with some syntactic sugar added
to C<connect> to get configuration information from Handel::ConfigReader. The whole point of using
DBIx::Class schemas is that fact that you can reuse any existing schemas you  have lying around for other
purposes. DBIx::Class offers an amazing amount of flexibility that allows Handel to mix and match most
schemas for use inside of Handel, even allowing for the changing of fields, components, and other things
on the fly.

An attempt is made to keep the default Handel schema restricted to only those fields that were the most
common, or necessary for almost every cart/order process.

=head1 SCHEMA CLASSES

=head2 L<Handel::Cart::Schema|Handel::Cart::Schema>

Handel::Cart::Schema is a subclass of DBIx::Class::Schema that takes care of preloading
Handel::Schema::DBIC::Cart and Handel::Schema::DBIC::Cart::Item for you.

=head2 L<Handel::Schema::DBIC::Cart|Handel::Schema::DBIC::Cart>

Handel::Schema::Cart is a schema class for the main cart table that holds basic information about each cart like
its name, description and the shopper id it belongs to.

=head2 L<Handel::Schema::DBIC::Cart::Item|Handel::Schema::DBIC::Cart::Item>

Handel::Schema::Cart::Item is a schema class for the table that holds the contents, or 'items' for each cart
in the carts table above. This includes fields like sku, quantity and price.

=head2 L<Handel::Order::Schema|Handel::Order::Schema>

Handel::Order::Schema is a subclass of DBIx::Class::Schema that takes care of preloading
Handel::Schema::DBIC::Order and Handel::Schema::DBIC::Order::Item for you.

=head2 L<Handel::Schema::DBIC::Order|Handel::Schema::DBIC::Order>

Handel::Schema::Order is a schema class for the main order table that holds basic information about each
order like the billing and shipping information, the order totals, etc.

=head2 L<Handel::Schema::DBIC::Order::Item|Handel::Schema::DBIC::Order::Item>

Handel::Schema::Order::Item is a schema class for the table that holds the contents, or 'items' for each order
in the carts table above. This includes fields like sku, quantity and price.

=head1 AUTHOR

    Christopher H. Laco
    CPAN ID: CLACO
    claco@chrislaco.com
    http://today.icantfocus.com/blog/
